add/redis: ssl connectivity (#429)
aiven/devportal: docs/products/redis/concepts/ssl-connectivity.rst

SSL connectivity
================

Client support for SSL-encrypted connections
--------------------------------------------

Default support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Aiven for Redis uses SSL encrypted connections by default. This is shown by the use of ``rediss://`` (with double s) prefix in the ``Service URI``. 

.. Tip::
    You can find the ``Service URI`` on `Aiven console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_.

> Since **Redis 6**, the redis-cli tool itself supports SSL connections; therefore, you can connect directly to your service using::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since **Redis 6**, the ``redis-cli`` tool itself supports SSL connections; therefore, you can connect directly to your service using::
```

    redis-cli -u rediss://username:password@host:port

Alternatively, you can use the third-party `redli tool <https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/redli>`_::

    redli -u rediss://username:password@host:port

Not every Redis client supports SSL-encrypted connections.

> In such cases, you would have to turn off SSL to use these clients, which is allowed but not recommended. In those cases, you have some options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, you would have to turn off SSL to use these clients, which is allowed but **not recommended**. You can use one of the following option to disable SSL
```

> Set up stunnel process

Author: I guess stunnel is more like the name of the process then a command itself, so I think makes sense to leave as it is

> Set up stunnel process

Author: nvm, I guess is because the spell checker here, thanks for the suggestion!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> One workaround for this, it is to set up a `stunnel process <https://www.stunnel.org/index.html>`_ on the client side to handle encryption for the clients that do not support SSL connections. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to keep SSL settings on database side, but hide it from the client side, you can set up a `stunnel process <https://www.stunnel.org/index.html>`_ on the client to handle encryption. 
```

> You can use the following stunnel configuration, for example ``stunnel.conf``, to set up a stunnel process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the following ``stunnel`` configuration file, named for example ``stunnel.conf``, to set up a ``stunnel`` process.
```

::

    client = yes
    foreground = yes
    debug = info
    delay = yes

    [redis]
    accept = 127.0.0.1:6380
    connect = myredis.testproject.aivencloud.com:28173
    TIMEOUTclose = 0
    ; For old services only. New ones use Let's Encrypt and there's no
    ; CA cert available from Aiven console. Most environments trust
    ; Let's Encrypt by default without any explicit CAfile config.
    ; CAfile = /path/to/optional/project/cacert/that/you/can/download/from/aiven/console

To understand the global options of the stunnel configuration, please check `Stunnel Global Options <https://www.stunnel.org/static/stunnel.html#GLOBAL-OPTIONS>`_.

For ``service-level option``, the following parameters are configured:  

``accept`` => *[host:]port*
  **Accept connections on specified address**

``connect`` => *[host:]port*
  **Connect to a remote address** 

``TIMEOUTclose`` => *seconds*
  **Time to wait for close_notify**

> .. note:: It is important to make changes accordingly to your service. On the *Overview* page you can find your **Overview** > **Host** and **Overview** > **Port** to configure the ``connect`` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: It is important to make changes accordingly to your service. On the *Overview* page you can find the **Host** and **Port** to configure the ``connect`` parameter.
```

Author: I'd like to keep the previous format if it is oki

> Note that when SSL is in use we have a separate service terminating the SSL connections before they are forwarded to Redis. This process has a connection timeout of its own independent of Redis' connection timeout. If you allow very long Redis timeouts, this frontend service may end up closing the connection before the Redis timeout has expired. By the time of writing this, timeout is set to 12 hours.

Reviewer: This paragraph is not clear in my opinion, where are the two timeouts? Can we explain it better?

Author: This was not clear for me as well, but I could clarify and now, it is. 

https://github.com/aiven/devportal/pull/429/commits/96c3eaae5088032a2f01aa93878d27e82e43c222

Thanks for pointing this so we could make it more clear. What do you think now?

Allow plain-text connections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Another alternative is to actually allow plain-text connections. To allow plain-text connections, you can change this setting with **Overview** > **Advanced configuration**, or using the :doc:`Aiven Command Line interface<../../../tools/cli>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alternative is to disable database SSL allowing plain-text connections. To allow plain-text connections, you can change this setting with **Overview** > **Advanced configuration**, or using the :doc:`Aiven Command Line interface<../../../tools/cli>`.
```

Author: I guess this is one of the alternatives not the only one, so imho `The alternative` may be not the proper term.

Reviewer 2: You could use "An alternative" here if you prefer. It's up to you whether you accept the suggested wording change (and you can make more changes after you do, if you want)

Author: oki, I will use `An alternative`

.. Warning::
    Allowing plain-text connections can have some implications regarding the security of your Redis service. If SSL is turned off, anyone who can eavesdrop on the traffic will be able to potentially connect and access your Aiven for Redis service.

> Alternatively, once installed, you should run::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable ssl on an existing Redis instance use the following aiven cli command (with link to avn update command)
```

>     avn login  # if you haven't logged in previously

Reviewer: I would remove the login phase, we can assume one knows to login

Author: I'd like to keep because it goes from those steps even if the user knows what to do. But you can not run the other command without the first one.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Francesco on this one. Users are not beginners, so they will be able to sort out the basics on the command: they are just looking for the specific thing they need. This is a tricky balance to strike and I'm not sure we have it well expressed in our guidelines at this point.

Author: This one I still do not agree but I will make the changes cause maybe you have different pov from mine and we should go what works for more people :)

    avn service update myredis -c "redis_ssl=false"

> After this, the ``Service URI`` will change and point at the new location, it will also start with the ``redis://`` prefix denoting that it's a direct Redis connection which does not use SSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After executing the command, the ``Service URI`` will change and point at the new location, it will also start with the ``redis://`` (removing the extra s) prefix denoting that it's a direct Redis connection which does not use SSL.
```

SSL connectivity
================

Client support for SSL-encrypted connections
--------------------------------------------

Default support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Aiven for Redis uses SSL encrypted connections by default. This is shown by the use of ``rediss://`` (with double s) prefix in the ``Service URI``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aiven for Redis uses SSL encrypted connections by default. This is shown, in the [Aiven Console](https://console.aiven.io/)  ``Service URI`` parameter, by the use of ``rediss://`` (with double s) prefix. 
```

.. Tip::

>     You can find the ``Service URI`` on `Aiven console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_.

Reviewer: We can now remove the tip since the info is included in the previous sentence

Since **Redis 6**, the ``redis-cli`` tool itself supports SSL connections; therefore, you can connect directly to your service using::

    redis-cli -u rediss://username:password@host:port

Alternatively, you can use the third-party `Redli tool <https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/redli>`_::

    redli -u rediss://username:password@host:port

Not every Redis client supports SSL-encrypted connections.

> In such cases, you would have to turn off SSL to use these clients, which is allowed but **not recommended**. You can use one of the following option to disable SSL.

Reviewer: One of the two options doesn't really disable SSL but rather bypasses the SSL problem by removing the SSL bit locally.
```suggestion
In such cases, you would have to turn off or bypass the SSL to use these clients, which is allowed but **not recommended**. You can use one of the following option to achieve this.
```

For ``service-level option``, the following parameters are configured:  

``accept`` => *[host:]port*
  **Accept connections on specified address**

``connect`` => *[host:]port*
  **Connect to a remote address** 

``TIMEOUTclose`` => *seconds*
  **Time to wait for close_notify**

.. note:: It is important to make changes accordingly to your service. On the *Overview* page you can find your **Overview** > **Host** and **Overview** > **Port** to configure the ``connect`` parameter.

It is important to note that when SSL is in use, HAProxy will be responsible for terminating the SSL connections before they get forwarded to Redis. This process has a connection timeout set to 12 hours which is not configurable by the customer. If you allow very long Redis timeouts, this SSL-terminating HAProxy may end up closing the connection before the Redis timeout has expired. This timeout is independent of Redis timeout.

Allow plain-text connections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> An alternative is disable database SSL allowing allow plain-text connections. To allow plain-text connections, you can change this setting with **Overview** > **Advanced configuration**, or using the :doc:`Aiven Command Line interface<../../../tools/cli>`.

Reviewer: We usually don't use `**Overview** > **Advanced configuration**` but rather write `**Overview** in the **Advanced configuration** section`

.. Warning::

>     Allowing plain-text connections can have some implications regarding the security of your Redis service. If SSL is turned off, anyone who can eavesdrop on the traffic will be able to potentially connect and access your Aiven for Redis service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Allowing plain-text connections can have some implications regarding the security of your Redis service. If SSL is turned off, anyone who can eavesdrop on the traffic will be able to steal the credentials, thus potentially connect and access your Aiven for Redis service.
```

> To disable SSL on an existing Redis instance use the following Aiven CLI command (with link to avn update command)

Reviewer: missing link to avn update command

Author: re-write cause it was not clear. thanks for pointing it out!
